but that is the unfortunate piece that
like today the people who should be
teaching they should be the most
knowledgeable they should have done
things been there
and
oppos today's guest is one of the first
key members of Facebook messenger's
first ever group he's basically the
reason why Facebook Messenger was built
in the world he was living in the states
then moved to London office of Facebook
and he was the key integral people at at
the London office as well he was living
his life but he left his cushy job all
that money he was making while working
at Facebook with the world's best
leaders and the founders why did he do
that he came back to India because he
realized that quality education in India
is really bad the situation right now is
really bad when it comes to engineer
specially now what is he doing in the
space what are the problems with Indian
education how is he solving those
problems what is he doing for the next
generation of entrepreneurs leaders and
engineers in the country also we have
spoken about how he's helping these
creators these Engineers these people to
become and find out billion dollar ideas
of tomorrow he's basically making India
ready for the next Revolution so that we
can lead in the world so we spoken about
many things with the co-founder of
scaler Academy anaman Singh and also we
spoke about how somebody can find
billion dollar ideas and if you already
have an idea how can you do or tweak
your business model in a way so that
your customers become your lifelong fans
keep watching this episode till the end
because you're going to learn not only
about what has happened in the past with
the job culture what is happening right
now in the Indian education system but
also how and what are the opportunities
present for you and me every common
person in the metaverse and web 3.0 so
that you and me can also become
multi-millionaires of
Tomorrow the first question I have is
Mana that you work a lot you work till
4:00 a.m. in the morning as well right
okay and a lot of people want to work
till 4:00 a.m. in the morning a lot of
people feel that hustle
culture but they can't do it because
they don't know how to get out of the
bed and do it actually I get very lazy
especially me and a lot of people I know
in my AUD audience as well as a constant
question how how to beat
procrastination so how do you beat
procrastination actually parts so one
part is motivation I I'll maybe take an
example and and um phrase that and the
second part is discipline okay but like
primarily it is motivation motivation
dreaming hoping um there's an
experiment this which is called as the
drowning rat experiment okay um
scientist
it was it's a very cruel experiment so I
don't endorse it but uh what they did
was they they
B and they started
measuring before these rats give up and
they drown um average came to around 15
minutes
okay then
these guys picked up another Chua put it
in the um
bucket just before it was 15 minutes so
at the 14 minute
Mark they made it warm they give it very
very good food next day after 24 hours
they put it in the bucket
again guess how much time did it uh keep
fighting before giving up 60 hours 60
hours 14 minutes 15 minutes hours and
the reason
was and that's actually true for all of
us in life as well right like if you
believe if you hope if you
dream so that is the first thing I mean
I do because there is a end goal that I
see
so that is the first part first part is
you motivation you have a hope you have
a big dream which you're working towards
because and second part is discipline
second part is discipline
discipline if I'm today sitting to do
something I have Instagram to check I
have um YouTube to check
because there is LinkedIn to check maybe
somebody is sending me a message there
there's WhatsApp to check Messenger to
check um you're so connected that it is
really really hard to focus and um
computer
science cont switching okay Contex
switching
is if it is a one it can do one work at
a
time let's say
Chows two different jobs
this process of dumping and then picking
up the new thing and reading all the
context of the new thing takes a lot of
time yeah and if a CPU is context
switching multiple times the computer or
the laptop becomes really slow
simp to get stuff done is like have
discipline create these Focus
slots this is not to
say that is I don't believe that ever
works you need to give yourself time as
well you need to give your family time
as well but make sure you have Focus
slots not doing everything at the same
time yeah everything at the same time
computer SL yes it makes so much sense I
have a SIM I have a similar thing but I
never thought of it as a motivation and
discipline segregate but now I have
given a terminology for this I'm going
to use it so many times I'm I'm stealing
this from you so this is what I believed
okay I used to say that every human
being
that's why he wakes up you know he works
really hard today to get the money to
get the security to get the life which
he believes in right
or so it's either aspiration or fear
these are the two reasons so that is why
so you need to associate your mind with
any one of them in order to get up and
work that is first and second which I
believe is the rule of one
thing consistent and you have to beat
procrastination for for long long period
of time in your life you need to follow
rule of one thing in your life so every
morning you wake up what is that one
thing I want to accomplish so you do
that
first first you achieve that first thing
people usually wake up with 20 things in
their mind they end up doing nothing
right same thing but you made it very
clear like a Compu
but now talking about the motivation
part right you have a motivation you
have a dream that is why you working so
hard and that dream is closely related
to the thing which we talked about in
our conversation before the podcast
started that Indian colleges sucks like
they they're bad right now the quality
education in our country lacks I mean
I'm not going to say that everything is
bad but most colleges most of it sucks
like it's bad in like why do you feel
there's a lack of quality education in
our country but reasons and like there's
so many reasons where do I start so um
I'll maybe go Point by Point okay uh
first is the the auditing framework or
the regulatory
structure is a good step
but
1970 you have to be physically
H
uh everything is if you're for example a
coder you don't need to be in a lab Lab
your computer is your lab yeah in fact
even if you're a mechanical engineer
civil engineer a lot of simulations
happen online you don't need really
really it's not it's it's it has changed
the mode of working has changed but our
regulatory framework hasn't changed okay
so hence one is we behind there but that
is again like a maybe a small reason the
there are larger reasons so the second
thing is unfortunately our society
doesn't believe in paying for education
that
muchers low
paid like teachers is the lowest paid
profession one of the lowest paid
profession which is unfortunate because
they should be highest paid right they
should be the highest RIT exactly like
um um if you look at the history of our
culture
um again I probably shouldn't be talking
about cast but the people who would
teach people who were considered uh like
sacred because they they were very
knowledgeable they were the they held
the highest position in the society yes
uh but AB what teachers who are supposed
to be imparting knowledge because they
know the most uh if you don't pay them
well then obviously they'll go and find
other professions where they get paid
enough most colleges I'm not saying all
colleges and this is a by the way a
phenomenon I saw in my own City lakau
there bunch of colleges there placement
season
plac
almost but that is the unfortunate piece
that like today the people who should be
teaching they should be the most
knowledgeable they should have done
things been there
and opposite people who don't have any
other option they end up becoming
teachers instead of people who have been
at the highest place them becoming
teachers that being said I not saying
that this is happening at all colleges
most colleges some colleges and like in
general pattern wise
broken Medical
Science people who would teach were
people who were practitioners doctor
hospital for example
hospital they are the ones also teaching
yeah so I am up to date with what is
happening in the outside world like
today I if I have to go and talk about
covid vaccine and vacine I know because
I I am there dealing with 20 patients
every day
um computer science and most
engineering professors
they don't go and do job they don't go
and like write
code
probably science yeah though uh
structurally broken um I I believe that
there needs to be an element of practice
uh to any profession yes uh otherwise
practical
examples you might be very knowledgeable
you might be very um talented but if
there is an element of practice it just
makes you better at what you do um so
that's the other piece that is broken I
think the fourth piece which is broken
uh uh is that most colleges today the
biggest fear that they have is ke how do
I make sure I'm following all
regulations set by AIC nobody is
thinking about Innovation curriculum
innovate how do I make sure my students
learn a lot how do we how do I get them
to experiment explore figure out
uh so the the the habit of um I mean if
you look at the stanfords and the MIT of
the world there is a lot of innovation
going on in every single thing that they
do
yes unfortunately in most colleges that
culture hasn't picked up yet picked up
yet most probably because everybody is
just taking those check boxes
regulations
follow um all of that combined and and
there is one final piece which is what
has happened in in the industry right
now is key
um the IT industry which is right now
the biggest industry it became the
biggest industry in the last 20 years or
so it exploded yeah 2001 2002
explosion everybody wanted to become
engineer yeah everybody hence was opting
for an engineering degree but you did
not have
colleges when there is a gap in supply
and demand supply and demand then you
try to sort of create the demand and
hence a lot of colleges crept up
Basics but because there was demand they
were still getting people
enrolling um this the entire duration of
2001 to 2020 there have been a lot of
hubs of colleges all throughout India uh
with very little substance in them yeah
majority
colleges and happened because of the
supply demand mismatch but
combinations there's no one reason but
all of it has come together to sort of
it makes it makes a lot of sense because
so there was a joke in my college okay
and I'm from a BBA background not not
typically engineering background right
so we used to have a joke and there was
this one kid in our College he's he's
now like a very good entrepreneur doing
really good for himself he used to come
in the class and he used to say
entrepreneurship
teacher how many times has he raised
funds how many times has he does he even
go to bank how many times does he
validate ideas or he checks up on
product Market fit like what is he doing
in his life we used to ask
and and everybody used to
think then we started asking this
question to everyone the finance
reachers the finance question questions
marketing teachers say marketing
questions and no teacher had a relevant
experience they all say we have 15 years
of Industry experience in what they
don't talk about it what do they do they
don't so that's one of the broken things
and second when you talked about
Innovations right we were just talking
about like like right from the scratch
every Department of college is is like
7s even today at a college I don't know
about your college but in my college we
have to make a DD
Demand right from the admissions
ad I mean forget about other other
Innovations right and even before we go
to college we're talking about entrance
exam
11 so I think the entire system is that
way broken right right what are you
views on that yeah I mean I've now been
in my career for more than 10 years I
have not used a single concept of all of
the slogging that I did for two years to
to prepare for J broken in fact
like
broken
okay actually the real life is about
like facing problems and figuring out
solutions to those problems um but the
entire test prep Market which is
J NE Med um that prepares us for topics
important and I will get really really
good marks in the in the final exam and
hence I will get into an IAT or uh an as
Etc and that's that's what my life goal
is that does not really prepare you for
what is going to happen in the real
world the real world wants you to think
the real world wants you to experiment
the real world want you to explore um
the real world is just a collection of
problem statements that you you go and
solve well unfortunately um those years
of your lives are wasted because you're
preparing to get into and this is very
unique to India by the way um India or
China those are the two countries which
have this massive culture of test prep
and then finally
like to prepare for a test so that you
can go and do engineering yeah all of
your college sorry school education
aside I feel that's a big waste of
talent um I hope it will get disrupted
someday you guys are there on the right
track probably but so for in real life
you need skills right right in real life
you need problem solving skills you need
XYZ skills in order to make money or in
order to work for the cause which you
really really care about right right how
can an average person start learning
skills and once they learn skills how do
they get opportunities from there yeah
actually skills misused so um I can talk
about for example IT industry because
I'm very close to that um in the IT
industry a lot of people in fact like if
you look at most advertisement people
talk about learning tools say um coding
May there are programming languages so
C++ or Java or python these are tools
everybody's advertising C++ come here
I'll teach you Java I'll teach you
python Etc ET all of that but the truth
is like if you look at a mechanic for
example
mechan scw maybe there is a tester of
electricity Etc but no mechanic says key
I am a screwdriver mechanic but in it
people say I am a python developer I'm a
Java developer that is fundamentally
broken again the real world doesn't say
doesn't care about the tool that you use
yeah the real world in the real world in
fact like what happens in most product
companies as well the large brands that
you see is you get a problem statement M
you figure out what is the right tool
for the job and you go and solve that
job what is important for skills is that
you learn the art of learning yeah um
one of the things that at least happened
very early on in my life which I'm very
grateful for is I got hooked into uh
something called competitive programming
um which trained me to look at problem
statements I mean computer programming
is you just get essentially a lot of
various kind of problem statements and
you have to use coding to figure out
solutions to those problem statements
now what language are you using Etc
doesn't matter doesn't not matter it's
inconsequential but if you do that a lot
of number of times then at least
behaviorally you expect to encounter
problem statements you're not uh afraid
of that and then you go and figure out a
solution that is actually what if you
see most top companies in the ecosystem
that is what they value as as well your
problem solving skills your ability to
learn new technologies new tools as and
when required because they at the end of
the day are tools yeah a mechanic will
will be given a fan to go and repair he
would never be told here is a
screwdriver you are a screwdriver
mechanic now go and fix whatever you can
with the screwdriver
and and it it does make
sense at the end of the day you about
correct you don't
care you don't give a correct
correct correct and that should be
promoted that is not being promoted
people are promoting the other side of
it right exactly exactly scw so so
that's the thing like which is which is
and people are falling for it yeah
people are falling for it I mean I can't
take names but but I mean look at most
brands you'll if you go and look at
their page their Pages would talk about
technology Big Data this that Etc said
I'll teach you all of that four big
words which people don't know about and
like okay let's do this but is this this
also because all of a sudden there's a
boom in the demand of software
developers right software Engineers like
everybody's talking about tech Talent
Tech talent in fact I read some tweet is
a massive like deaon okay and the
founder of that company tweets that if
you are if you think you're considerably
a good Tech Talent come work for us
we'll pay you 20% more than what you're
getting already it's an offer for
everyone and read that tweet I was like
I shocked
[Laughter]
like
20% so why do you feel all of a sudden
there's such a huge demand for software
engineering so if I mean it was expected
but it wasn't expected that it would
happen so soon
essentially there is a term called
Industrial Revolution 5.0 I think 4.0 or
5.0 I keep I keep getting confused but
um what it was happening was that every
single sector uh was getting was
identifying what are my redundant tasks
or what are the things that I can
automate which will make me much
stronger for example the largest car
company today is Tesla Tesla is half car
company and half tech company more tech
company than more tech company than a
car company exactly right so uh that is
happening in every single sector like um
I I was in London for a year um there I
saw like two job functions automated
within the span of a year one was
um they have these tubes where there
were these ticket counters where you go
and buy
tickets in in a matter of 3 months I saw
those ticket counters being replaced by
vending machines and the second was I
had a friend who was working for this
oil company and uh his job was that he
would I mean so there would be a feed of
or there was a video feed of um oil
pipelines pipeline
review because leaks are very expensive
in their context uh he told me team 50
60 they've now reduced that team to
three people because now there are
systems that can do this monitoring and
they can flag maybe and then there's
this human who goes and
verify what happened post
is the speed of this happening got
really accelerated because every single
sector every single um uh industry
started to realize there is no other
option than to go digital yeah right
like all for example entire e-commerce
everything shifted to online order yeah
you have to go to
school you have to study online right um
Even in our case like the the higher
education as well has to happen online
so everybody was forced to go digital to
think about digital ways to interact to
engage to build products on so because
that happened now suddenly um Everybody
Needs software engineer every single
industry needs software Engineers now
there there are industries that are
building a software engineering lab
because uh they want to accelerate this
process and the effects of this you'll
see for the next 5 to 10 years and hence
there is suddenly this spike in demand
for software Engineers which you'll see
even increase a lot more going forward
will it increase or do you think because
there are everybody is focusing on
software developers or software
Engineers it'll go down because there'll
be access
Supply um so it is to be honest like not
about the supply of people who can call
themselves software Engineers okay it is
typically the uh supply of quality
software Engineers the kind of software
Engineers which I told you right like I
can give you a problem statement in the
real world you can go and solve it
because that's that's the core of what
is happening in Industrial Revolution
5.0 I will not tell you that Java use
pleas but rather here is a problem
statement every single job function it
is I mean a lot of people come and tell
me
Unemployment uh it is the nature of job
function that is changing oil pipeline
case maybe while the number of people
went from 60 to three of people who are
monitoring this it created a lot of
other jobs which were software
engineering in nature now somebody had
to go build these systems to monitor the
pipelines somebody had to keep improving
that and it was not one person but a
team of software Engineers so the nature
of jobs is changing and flux it will
keep changing for the next 10 years or
so now then it's a question of how
quickly are we producing very quality
software Engineers we're not producing
enough hence the the 20% blank hike or I
mean there are companies giving you free
Dubai trips uh
bikes and laptops IP everything come
join this is what you're going to get
everything you're going to get but let's
say somebody who's listening to this
podcast and believes in that he has now
acquired certain skills and he's not
like a python developer or something but
he's a developer or he's somebody in
some different field right who feels
like I'm a hustler I can get things done
I'm a good guy how does that person who
has skilled himself enough or herself
enough how can they find opportunities
in today's world
what's the best way to do it so if you
are skilled then opportunities is to be
honest the easier part
um I I know that I I'm sitting at a very
privileged position saying that the
opportunities is the easier part but
I'll tell you like why I say it's the
easier part there's one there are lot of
platforms that now enable companies and
people to get connected with each other
for example in the field of tech uh Tech
hiring there is uh noer there is insta
hire there is top hire uh a bunch of
these kind of platforms where inel list
um you go and you can connect with
companies most probably like if you
apply to maybe 5 10 companies you'll get
one or two responses Y and you don't
really want that every single company
responds even if you get to interview at
one or two places you can crack that
that's that's that's awesome um the
second thing
is the fact that you're really really
good at um
software it's a super power in today's
world yep it is you can actually go and
build things on your own if you wanted
to that is I mean if you look at a trend
today most CEOs of the top tech
companies um actually top companies most
top highest valued companies now it's no
more Tech it's all top companies all top
companies they they are people with
technical background in the past very
recently the CEO of Twitter um he was
the C of Twitter before yeah he was a
chief technology officer of Twitter
before to um the other thing that it
enables you to do is comp start comp
start you you figure out a problem
around you things that you see are
broken you try to fix it with tech um so
there are enough jobs jobs are exploding
there are a bunch of platforms that help
you connect with jobs and more than
anything else like if you are one of
those who dream and who can create you
can go and create yeah so quickly like a
quick question is apart from being a
software developer apart being being a
tech Talent what do you feel are the top
three skills which are really in demand
or which will keep going up in demand
because like when you're in college
right you're you're fresh you can you're
like that clay who can be molded in
anything which you want and you can
learn any any godamn skill which you
want to learn right so what are the top
three skills that somebody should learn
so that they can Safeguard in the future
and they can have this ability to solve
problem right I'm a little biased here I
mean so I would say that look I mean
coding is is necessary for everybody
like at least some some what if people
like us have no ground of coding I have
no future no I mean so there there are
certain skills which are which are
always going to be Evergreen for example
marketing brand building those are those
are going to be basic needs for any
company Yeah the more companies start
the more that needs I mean there is more
noise and then there is more the need to
stand out and hence that is an evergreen
skill so marketing if you're good at
that if you're very creative um you have
a very safe future
[Laughter]
uh I believe like marketing uh the other
thing that has been actually talked
about and now is picking up a little bit
of pace is um is I think just core at
the core being able to run or like know
the art of running a
business um now that is a very very
broad term but the art of running a
business is at the end of the day like
being able to take decisions which are
right most of the time um and and it is
also slowly evolving into a science
yeah strategic decision making yeah so
some of it is domain relevance and then
some of it is is uh can be driven by
data and then like that is that is where
things like data science come into the
picture so analytics and data science
they're also going to to stay over so
first is brand marketing second is
analytics and data and third third is uh
and this is also very cliche very very
old profession but I again believe that
is always going to u to to live is is
sales sales okay hardcore sales hardcore
sales yeah I mean typically most uh most
important skill for a company is now
that you've created value you've built
something that has value being able to
sell that to people now you could be
selling to people you could be selling
to Enterprises to companies but
eventually you have to go and sell it
yeah because that is what is going to
generate Revenue at the end of the day
um every company that you see in our
ecosystem today has a large marketing
function has a large sales function and
has a large Tech function yeah so hence
I say like you need to get really good
at either Marketing sales or Big Data
because this is what his future is led
by after coding after aftering so this
was my backup option was right like I
keep talking to my dad and my dad says
that Tik Tok Instagram
ban yeah yeah if if YouTube gets banned
like what are you going to do what's
your backup option and I say a I already
running like couple of businesses that's
my backup option my dad said everything
gets shot what's your backup option I'm
like I'm going to find out some startup
and tell them I'm going to do marketing
and branding for you that is the last
option I have so I get like a good sense
of security right
now people are like validating my idea
right now we're talking about jobs
talking about
opportunities you have worked with the
OG right like you have worked the the
dream entrepreneur which everybody take
examples of like you worked with zook
what was what was your biggest learning
while you were at Facebook uh While
You're Building at Facebook and working
with the team of Mark zerber or
himself two learnings primarily one um
it does not matter how hard you work
what what you get I mean how much lines
of code you write how many meetings you
do at the end of the day all that
matters is what impact you made
eventually what you get
paid is a function of the amount of
wealth you generate M the wealth you
generate is a function of the impact you
create
so that was the first realization
because when I joined Facebook I was
just a graduate out of college and at
that point like it was a lot about hey I
will here's a very cool problem
statement that I'm solving here's a very
cool Tech let me go and try that uh in
just 6 to 9 months I realized like
coolness is less important what is
important is what I'm doing what I'm
building what is that doing to the end
audience what kind of impact is it is
creating to the end users if the impact
is high eventually you'll you'll become
big asset big asset for every anybody
right so the art of creating impact the
art of actually identifying where can I
create impact and continuously doing
that that's that's one very very
important skill the second thing that I
realized was and this is a sort of a
management principle at Facebook as well
is that people do their
best when you are able to clearly
identify what they are passionate about
and you're able to give them to do
something that that they really really
pass about so one of the things that for
example Facebook had was that when you
join Facebook you're not allocated to a
team there is a 6 we boot camp okay
where you work with every single team in
in Facebook you go do something very
small with let's say photos team you go
do something very small with messages
Team you go do something very small with
Pages team you go explore and figure out
what you're really really interested in
you go come and tell us like what you're
really passionate about what do would
you like to do in the next six months
one year because when you give people
that Independence then people run they
Sprint because then they they want to
actually I told you about the motivation
part right yeah this is cracking the
motiv this is like the classic
Management training kind of uh position
for six weeks they're just accelerating
the thing right like how big mnes have
two years of Mt program one year of
management training program they make
you work at different different organ uh
but this is happening in Tech at at at
Facebook so every single software
engineer gets to do that like for six
weeks and then you choose so that became
clear to us as well like when even when
we are hiring it is important to
understand what what drives a person if
you're able to I mean skill alone is not
yeah if you are able to identify that
here is a person who's really interested
in let's say solving this kind of a
problem and you're able to put them to
solve that problem they'll do a
massively good job at it so you put so
for 6 weeks you leave them with multiple
people and then whoever is spending most
of the time at some place you automatic
Ally kind of know what he's doing and
then what kind of impact is he making I
think what stood out for me in this
answer was that you said in at the end
of the day it's not about how hard you
work it's about how much impact you're
making or how much wealth you're
creating for the organization or for
yourself because that's that going to
Define how well you're going to do or
how big of an asset you become it's so
true most of the times we always hear
work hard work harder keep doing this
and work harder means like like run for
20 hours a day I mean you know that's
typically not with the example but
that's typically at like if you're a
coder write hundreds of cod lines every
goddamn minute then if you're a content
creator create like thousands of videos
every day like working hard is that but
working hard doesn't mean that at all
right I mean working hard alone is not
enough you have to make sure that you're
working hard with an objective in mind
that this is what I want to achieve and
here is the best place where I can put
all of my efforts
that's an interesting framework I think
this is going to stand out for me from
this podcast okay so
what then you felt like you were
learning in Facebook Facebook is a dream
company why did you move to India then
like why did you come back here um you
were in States right yeah I was in
States uh for three years I was one year
in London setting up the Facebook London
office um I mean life was good life was
very comfortable because I'm sure there
will be many perks you a tech Talent one
of the four people who got hired from
India so having fun companies like
Facebook Google they take they take
really really good care of you for
example even your laundry you don't have
to do oh they they they do your laundry
they pay for your food they they and
they have like really good food in the
office um in fact Google has this policy
that you don't no employee should have
to walk more than 100 actually 100 m or
10 m to get food so you have a mini
cafeteria just like 10 20 M away away
from you from every desk wow wow and
it's sted with chocolates and cashew
nuts and a bunch of other things right
so um tech companies are really good at
spoiling
you hence the demand that's why nobody
wants you like f it's so hard to get you
that they want they don't want you to
leave yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah I mean I
shouldn't be saying this but like most
of those companies are black holes
people go but they never leave then how
did you leave like why did you leave why
did you come back to yeah actually so
few things right one is um both me and
abim Manu abanu is my co-founder we used
to we were like creators at heart we
would be even when we were in college uh
we created a couple of things one one
was this U we created this product
called duck which was uh a product which
where you could control your electrical
appliances from your laptop and it would
detect anomalies in patterns for example
if your AC is still running in the
afternoon but it's us usually not
running in the afternoon it was just
flag that maybe you did not intend to
leave it open so um we did that we also
built
Anonymous um chatting Forum which we
realized was a bad
decision you had your own mini version
of Yahoo messenger or yeah it was uh um
less Yahoo messenger think of it more
like Gossip Girl as a product yeah um
which which we figured out like was a
lot of scandals and hence we shut it
down okay um but I mean because we
always wanted to create something that
was uh that was something we wanted to
do anyhow um and the second thing is
like I based on the personal experiences
as well I felt that I mean we are a
family of Engineers my younger brothers
they're also Engineers okay so I felt
like that's that's something that
majority of India is doing and if it is
broken to the extent that we just
described um I did not even have a
solution in mind we just figured let's
let's go and fix it that's one problem
statement to pick Let's solve for the
solution and we felt that we had made
enough money by then to be to to be able
to sustain ourselves for one fun two
years was like actually five six years
because you don't want to uh take
decisions for the companies which are
good for the short run you want to take
decisions which are good for the long
run if you're creating a company that
would Outlast you so um and we felt like
if we are at this problem statement for
long enough without giving up we'll
eventually figure out a solution we
still figuring out a solution but but I
mean so so hence both me and ABI Manu we
we moved back to India we started we
initially started with um with the
thesis that maybe free content is the
way to solve it uh we were big fans of
dualingo so we tried almost creating
like a dualingo for programming uh it
was called interview
but what we realize over a period of
time is I mean there's so much more to
education content is exactly like books
yeah so you can create really awesome
books but just because you have books
lying around does not mean that I'll
become
knowledgeable just because I have books
on surgeries in at my home I don't
become a surgeon yeah or at least I hope
I don't become a
surgeon so so books are one part of the
puzzle but content does not define
education content is hygiene education
is we realized and this was a learning
over the last six years or so content is
a lot more about motivation engagement
and addiction motivation engagement and
addiction yeah I mean if you if you can
get somebody addicted like just for
example if you look at kids they adicted
to playing video games you don't have to
tell them that you go play video game
for two year two two hours now if you
leave them alone they'll probably play
video games for like 6 hours straight 7
hours straight right and uh if you can
get people to spend that amount of time
on
education the learning automatically
happens you'll falter you'll falter but
you'll eventually figure it out uh um so
so hence education is a lot more about
how do I evoke that interest in you and
how do I make it super
interesting um if you look at most TV
shows that are most popular today
they're all lessons in history yeah Rome
is about Roman culture um Game of
Thrones is mythological but again like
kind of build out of culture of like
that people binge watch but nobody wants
to study that history book this just you
know like it's a game of addiction
engagement makes sense I this is so good
I think this is going to be like a
guiding principle from me to create
content from here
off because it does make sense if you
are able
to if you're able to make somebody
addict to your content and make them sit
there for like 5 hours without you
asking them constantly to sit there
right I think you have done the job then
whatever you're talking whatever
teaching
you have the power to shape that
person's mind in a way maybe for good or
bad like it's on you and that's a very
good thing to do it's it's crazy how you
think about that
particular you know I'm just I'm just
trying to think of like other examples
of how we can make this possible how we
can make this big and make it possible
at a scale where everybody and every
startup is doing this so that we change
like the the system as a narrative in
the country right right no actually
there's a framework around this so
there's a book called hooked by Nal yeah
it talks about uh how do you create
these engagement Loops okay um which
gets people hooked for example if you
see Facebook as a website or Instagram
as a website it's a it's a website that
hooks you you get addicted to it right
like you it's almost becomes
involuntarily it becomes a pattern in
your behavior you have to click on that
app you have to scroll yeah you have to
look at stories they they've cracked the
game of Engagement they've cracked the
game of keeping you hooked and it's a
it's a science there is an activation
point which is a notification coming to
you saying that this person has sent you
a message or this person has liked your
image that's the activation point and
then uh there is so there is uh the law
of
um it says unexpected returns or
something I mean basically you do
something and you don't know how much
return are you going to get for example
you create a video you don't know how
much how many views are you going to get
the more number of views you get that is
that creates a dopamine effect very
similarly I create a post how many likes
am I I'm going to get I don't know how
many comments I'm going to get I don't
know but that creates that dopamine
effect I slowly start to crack it and
all of that creates this hook this cycle
education as well like it's a very
similar science um we feel good about
doing that so uh we we we've been on
this path like for the last six year
trying to crack this Loop what what
creates this Loop of people coming back
some of it is human element some of it
is product element some of it is content
element so talking about talking about
science and building something worth
engaging right you you use the word
which it you at the end of the day the
goal is to build something build a
company which can Outlast you yeah right
what do you think are the three pillars
to build something which can Outlast
like how what are the three guiding
principles in a company which is getting
built to outlast Founders Outlast the
initiate set of team right right I think
first is um just the framework that
whenever you take decisions of a company
um if you're building a company that is
that you're building for the short run
and you want an exit you want to sell it
you want to make quick Buck then all of
the decisions you take are good for the
short term right I might push somebody
to just buy my product yeah I might
blackmail somebody into buying my
product because it's giving me Revenue
right now right the growth figures right
now yeah but if you if you want to build
a company for the long run it is okay to
take take decisions that are probably
bad for the shortterm they make your
Revenue
dip they they they're bad for the
shortterm but they're good for the long
term because you're building things that
will actually uh give you returns in the
longer run uh for example a lot of
Education companies if you look at um
they have very very high gross margin
what is the meaning of gross margin
essentially um if I let's say if you pay
me x amount for buying the product how
much money am I spending in delivering
the product to you essentially what what
what kind of features and etc etc right
so most people don't spend a lot of
money here they spend most of their
money in sales and marketing yeah uh but
the thing is if you're building a
company for the longer run then you
spend most of your money here not on
sales and marketing you still spend some
money on Sal not as much as you do not
as much right uh because you know that
if people are really happy with this
part if people if you're creating a lot
of promoters in this part this will help
you in the next 10 years might not help
you in the immediate immediate profit SL
Revenue Etc right so all of your
decision framework then becomes what is
good for me 10 years down the line yeah
not what is good for me in the next
month or next two months so that's
principle number one principle number
two is um if you're building a company
that you're going to be at it for like
next 10 years 20 years it should be
something that makes you happy okay the
motivation part right I one feel very
passionately about the problem statement
and I feel I'm I'm I in internally feel
that I'm doing good for the world I'm
I'm adding something to the ecosystem or
whatever makes you happy right like it
just it just makes you happy yeah be it
whatever drives you but like if you're
going to do something for the next 10
years 20 years it should make you really
happy that that you're doing it uh
because like you can't be sad for like
20 years right
that's that's what you're going to be
spending most of your life on yeah um as
a third part so so that that's the
important bit and uh the third part is I
mean uh typically very very long-lasting
companies usually are driven by missions
because it is not you alone who's going
to be solving that problem there will be
people joining you on that journey and
hence storytelling and being Mission
driven actually motivates other people
to come and join you because then people
don't join you because you you're the
highest spare in the market yeah they
join you because they also believe in
what you believe so uh if you are a
mission driven company if you've done a
good job at storytelling of why you're
doing what you're doing um then you'll
find a lot of people come along in the
journey to help you build what you're
trying to build and that is very
important I mean the company the the
term company means a collection of
people it does not say founder yeah it's
it's a company so the people around this
company they matter a lot
so those are the three things I believe
I mean obviously like it's my personal
opinion now have a question on like on
this
okay why are you doing what you're doing
at scalo like what's your why what's
your mission right I mean um so started
with the fact that Tech education is
broken uh over a period of time we've
realized that education at least in the
higher education segment is is the most
productive years of a individual okay
like you you're spending your your I
mean you you you're probably 16 or 17
when you start your college education
and then like you do it till you're 21
22 this is when you have the highest
amount of
energy and unfortunately right now we're
wasting that
Capital if you multiply the number of
people by those number of years you're
wasting an immense amount of energy and
capital in the world yeah um what drives
us is that if we are able to do even a
10% 20% job of fixing
it cumulatively that's a that's a heavy
heavy amount of impact and uh there is a
study by Stanford that actually talks
about how education is directly
correlated to GDP of a Nation okay the
the more talented individuals you're
able to produce the more um skilled
individuals you're able to produce they
get together to build things it's I mean
there's a term called Zero Sum okay yeah
U what is zerm is that for example let's
say if I'm play playing a football match
if my team wins then your team has to
lose hence it's a zero sum yeah if one
person wins the other person has to lose
for example test prep J for example is
also zero Z there are only these number
few others have to get rejected right so
if here are 5,000 people are getting
selected that means others have to get
rejected um our GDP and our ecosystem is
not zero some because I mean apart from
the existing jobs that are out there you
can create cre new jobs you can create
new companies because there're always
going to be inconveniences or problem
statements to solve yeah everybody's
cribbing about how our government is bad
this is bad that is bad take that
problem statement solve it you'll create
a good company for yourself um so so
there's always going to be that and
hence like if you have people in the
ecosystem that are capable of picking a
problem statement and solving it they
they'll they'll keep adding to that more
and more it's not Zero Sum hence I mean
the the more those kind of people you
have the better the GDP look at Silicon
Valley like Silicon Valley is just one
small state in the entire world has
probably the highest GDP in the world
higher GDP than India the the one
state wow but people because since the
beginning we have been playing zero some
game we have been brought up in that
environment that we still play Zero some
game even after we when we leave
education like school is a zero some
game like some people have to become
first
top
10 right then there Tess prep which
you're talking about so most of the
games which we have been playing races
football games all of that most of the
things which give us the initial set of
appreciation or sense of belongingness
or sense of Happiness are related to
zero some game yeah actually I'm sorry
like cut but there is this very
interesting incident I that happened I
was talking to this one gentleman he is
um he's 38 years old
he is now a manager in a big ID service
company and he was telling
me he is reporting to me this is because
we have conditioned to think of zero
some game
[Music]
yeah and that is the problem that
is like I am ahead of you in this game
right I'm bigger than you I'm better
than you and that's a constant need and
if we take this out lot of good can be
done yeah so we talked about things like
what is broken we talked about what's
your why we talked about how the future
is going to look like if we do if we
take out all of this obviously the GDP
is going to go up impact is going to be
higher people are going to be much more
fulfilled and happier okay and this is a
question I ask everyone but since I know
you're like a hardcore Tech Guy before I
ask the last question I would have the
second last question what are your views
on metaverse or web 3.0 or where the
world is going ahead
now so um because you're you're
producing the talent like with your
startup right which technically like
half of them are going to work into
something like this and build a bigger
future as well sure sure sure I
[Music]
mean you answer the why you answer the
necessity and then you answer okay this
is what can achieve it um so one of the
things for example time everybody was at
their home everybody is interacting on
Zoom or some kind of uh video app that
experience is still not at par with
let's say meeting physically the kind of
bond we would develop because we've met
physically is very different from the
kind of bond we would develop if we were
on a zoom yeah right
and in fact like even there's a tweet by
Kunal sha where he says that one of the
biggest thing that most youngsters are
losing out in this kind of an
environment is ke if I'm sitting in an
office and there are two seniors
discussing a strategy I can listen onto
what they're discussing uh even though
I'm not sort of part of that
conversation but just by listening to
that I I I can embe a lot of
learning because I mean in the virtual
world you're just very focused
conversations not very human we're not
used to that kind of conversations so
hence the problem
is I mean people in the US are talking
to people in India very very often
people in I'm talking to a bunch of
people in Europe Etc ET so how do we
solve this problem ke I can actually sit
and observe I can I feel a a more
stronger Bond when I talk to you uh
that's the why and solve everybody is
trying to do different things one of the
approach one of the solution is
metaverse okay what if I have put on
this
headset and this headset controls most
of my senses essentially what I perceive
is a combination of five senses that I
have yeah if it can control most of my
sensus then it's as if I've been
transported into a new world in fact
there's a very good movie Ready Player
one you should you should probably watch
it um I've been transported into this
world where I feel as if I'm sitting
here and I can look around and I can see
people around me I can tap on somebody's
shoulder and I can have a conversation
with them I can shake hands with them I
can do everything that I can do in a
physical world if I can replicate that
there there's a big if if I can
replicate that then it solves for a very
very important problem that now I can
mingle with people no matter where they
are I can be attending a concert yeah
concert with like people from everywhere
in the in India just like who have put
on their headset and they they're
listening to the concert I'm sitting
beside somebody I'm just getting to know
them all of that happening organically
this is just solving for human
connections so that's the
why now how close do we get to that
solution is that solution going to be as
good as almost a physical um setup we
don't know but we are headed there I
mean the uh especially Oculus Etc The
Quest 2 I was very recently playing
around with it it has made significant
amount of progress in that direction
again whether we'll be able to solve it
not solve it we don't know but this is a
big major leap in the human connection
setup it feels good it feels good to
play when you're having the headset but
it feels very annoying to wear it for
more than 30 minutes yeah so there's
still a lot to be done there but that's
the problem statement that they're
trying to solve yeah how do we get
people from all around the world to feel
more connected to each other because
it's as if I'm I'm sitting beside you
and having this conversation I know you
more intimately yes um that's
metaverse web 3.0 um the I'll tell you
where it started from the why where it
started from and to be honest like I
don't know how much it's going to grow
but because there are there are few
personal opinions that I have there but
um but like where it started from was
that currency currencies like let's say
INR or US Dollars Etc imagine today you
generate some amount of wealth let's say
you have a million dollars with you what
you would typically want is that today
with this million dollar I can go and
buy some XY Z amount of stuff yeah which
is called the purchasing power of this
capital I would want to make sure that
10 years down the line this whatever
money I have has the same purchasing
power yep but it doesn't happen so
because there is inflation the the the
value of this Capital that reduces with
time and currencies fluctuate if you for
example um there have been countries
that have had massive inflation hper
inflations Zimbabwe Zimbabwe in
Venezuela where all of the money that I
had would probably have zero value in in
in 10 years from now right so so there
is I mean for people who have wealth one
big problem statement is how do I make
sure that this asset that I own is safe
okay uh and today it is not safe because
it is regulated by governments and hence
is very very dependent on that
government's
economy how that government performs and
their economy performs correct so hence
there was
uh hence Bitcoin was born which is how
do we make an a currency which is not
tied to a government's performance but
rather it is decentralized in nature um
no government controls it it's it's
controlled by the people and it is in
certain sense uh protected from
inflation to a certain extent the
purchasing power Remains the Same yeah
um that was the problem statement with
which it started now there are merits to
having currency not regulated there are
merits to having currency it is
decentralized and hence it has been
adopted by various people um it is still
possible that cryptocurrency Etc can
become huge because if you look at
wealth wealth is controlled by very few
people yeah as long as you have buying
from them you have almost bought into a
new formal new paradigm of
currency on the other hand web 3.0 or
blockchain is this another technology
where you we say that look even
Technologies should be decentralized for
example Facebook should be decentralized
which is there is no Facebook Authority
controlling Facebook it is People to
People yeah I mean I am having chat with
you no nobody needs to know even
Facebook does not need to know um I am
searching for something on web Google
does not need to know it should be
decentralized between people while that
is a great concept makes a lot of sense
but in my opinion most products are
driven by distribution there has to be
somebody making sure a lot of people are
using Facebook yeah there should be
using Google I'm still not clear on how
blockchain will solve or cross that
barrier for non-financial transaction
with Finance there seems to be a very
very direct fit again my personal
opinion I'll get a lot of laack for this
because there are so many blockchain
Fanboys who come and start shouting at
me uh but I that's on first principles
that's where I see the Gap yeah U both
very exciting Technologies um but I mean
I don't know how they'll evolve right
now you're still not very bullish on any
of them you're waiting like you're
taking a third seat and observing what's
going to happen how it's going to get
evolved yeah I mean metaverse to some
extent um cryptocurrency to a large
extent uh web 3.0 blockchain in other
aspects of the products still very
skeptical but I also feel most of the
times what's going to happen is uh like
when you have a decentralized finance
right let's say you send money to some
like a wrong address right now today
like you can call up HDFC and be like
hey what you know this is what I did can
you block my transaction right now can
when you do this and that there you
can't do that so that's also going to be
like an essential problem because here
you you know that somebody there
responsible who can at least help me out
to do something or maybe reverse my
credit transaction do something about it
right right there there's nothing going
to be there so I think that's going to
be the big big big big problem when it
comes to trust and when when it becomes
mainstream but obviously every
technology has its own problems to solve
and they get solved over the time the
last question is I asked this to
everyone
is if you were not working at scalo H
okay what do you think is the next big
opportunity in our country and where
would you be
working that's a very deep
question uh because if I if I ask people
where would you working they say oh in
tech only no no no yeah exactly if you
were not working in attech when do you
think is the next billion dollar
opportunity hm
I mean I'm I'm a person who's driven a
lot by first principles on first
principles where you see problem around
yourself um and and typically like if
you're in a country like India you see
problems almost everywhere like there is
an opportunity everywhere uh for example
I mean and one good litmus test of where
big opportunities are you just look at
new open up the news channel and you see
like what are people most cribbing about
uh if it is the farm bills that people
are most cribbing about maybe there's an
opportunity that like Agri Tech is is is
a large opportunity to go and capture um
if education is what most people are
cribbing about then education is where
is where you have the next opportunity
solution I don't know and I believe
again the same framework that if you're
at a problem statement for long enough
if you give it your all you'll
eventually figure out a solution
um so in my framework maybe just look at
the where wherever the most amount of
noise is what people are cribbing the
most about and so if this go if this
goes down like let's say if you want to
shut it down you want to get it out and
then that day you will open your news
channel for 5 days straight and be like
okay
P talking that's a good framework that's
a good way to look at opportunities and
that's a good way to actually identify
thanks a lot for doing this thank you so
much I hope you enjoyed the conversation
as much as I did I did and I loved
couple of things like that stood out for
me I think it's not only for the
audience
but there are few things which I'm going
to take home and work on myself because
I think you have you have few
philosophies of principles which you
follow which can help every content
creator every entrepreneur I mean
regardless of whether they're a coder or
or they're trying to build something in
at Tech it's going to help like a lot of
people because it makes sense it's no
rocket science I don't know why we never
thought about it but but it's so good
thank you so much for doing this thanks
for thank you for hosting me thank you
for hosting me thank you so much